
# Chapter 4

# Traps and system calls

There are three kinds of event which cause the CPU to set aside ordinary execution of instructions
and force a transfer of control to special code that handles the event. One situation is a system
call, when a user program executes theecallinstruction to ask the kernel to do something for
it. Another situation is anexception: an instruction (user or kernel) does something illegal, such as
divide by zero or use an invalid virtual address. The third situation is a deviceinterrupt, when a
device signals that it needs attention, for example when the disk hardware finishes a read or write
request.

This book usestrapas a generic term for these situations. Typically whatever code was execut-
ing at the time of the trap will later need to resume, and shouldn’t need to be aware that anything
special happened. That is, we often want traps to be transparent; this is particularly important for
device interrupts, which the interrupted code typically doesn’t expect. The usual sequence is that
a trap forces a transfer of control into the kernel; the kernel saves registers and other state so that
execution can be resumed; the kernel executes appropriate handler code (e.g., a system call imple-
mentation or device driver); the kernel restores the saved state and returns from the trap; and the
original code resumes where it left off.

Xv6 handles all traps in the kernel; traps are not delivered to user code. Handling traps in the
kernel is natural for system calls. It makes sense for interrupts since isolation demands that only
the kernel be allowed to use devices, and because the kernel is a convenient mechanism with which
to share devices among multiple processes. It also makes sense for exceptions since xv6 responds
to all exceptions from user space by killing the offending program.

Xv6 trap handling proceeds in four stages: hardware actions taken by the RISC-V CPU, some
assembly instructions that prepare the way for kernel C code, a C function that decides what to do
with the trap, and the system call or device-driver service routine. While commonality among the
three trap types suggests that a kernel could handle all traps with a single code path, it turns out to
be convenient to have separate code for two distinct cases: traps from user space, and traps from
kernel space. Kernel code (assembler or C) that processes a trap is often called ahandler; the first
handler instructions are usually written in assembler (rather than C) and are sometimes called a
vector.


### 4.1 RISC-V trap machinery

Each RISC-V CPU has a set of control registers that the kernel writes to tell the CPU how to
handle traps, and that the kernel can read to find out about a trap that has occurred. The RISC-V
documents contain the full story [3].riscv.h(kernel/riscv.h:1)contains definitions that xv6 uses.
Here’s an outline of the most important registers:

- stvec: The kernel writes the address of its trap handler here; the RISC-V jumps to the
    address instvecto handle a trap.
- sepc: When a trap occurs, RISC-V saves the program counter here (since thepcis then
    overwritten with the value instvec). Thesret(return from trap) instruction copiessepc
    to thepc. The kernel can writesepcto control wheresretgoes.
- scause: RISC-V puts a number here that describes the reason for the trap.
- sscratch: The trap handler code usessscratchto help it avoid overwriting user registers
    before saving them.
- sstatus: The SIE bit insstatuscontrols whether device interrupts are enabled. If the
    kernel clears SIE, the RISC-V will defer device interrupts until the kernel sets SIE. The SPP
    bit indicates whether a trap came from user mode or supervisor mode, and controls to what
    modesretreturns.

The above registers relate to traps handled in supervisor mode, and they cannot be read or
written in user mode.
Each CPU on a multi-core chip has its own set of these registers, and more than one CPU may
be handling a trap at any given time.
When it needs to force a trap, the RISC-V hardware does the following for all trap types:

1. If the trap is a device interrupt, and thesstatusSIE bit is clear, don’t do any of the
    following.
2. Disable interrupts by clearing the SIE bit insstatus.
3. Copy thepctosepc.
4. Save the current mode (user or supervisor) in the SPP bit insstatus.
5. Setscauseto reflect the trap’s cause.
6. Set the mode to supervisor.
7. Copystvecto thepc.
8. Start executing at the newpc.


Note that the CPU doesn’t switch to the kernel page table, doesn’t switch to a stack in the
kernel, and doesn’t save any registers other than thepc. Kernel software must perform these tasks.
One reason that the CPU does minimal work during a trap is to provide flexibility to software;
for example, some operating systems omit a page table switch in some situations to increase trap
performance.
It’s worth thinking about whether any of the steps listed above could be omitted, perhaps in
search of faster traps. Though there are situations in which a simpler sequence can work, many
of the steps would be dangerous to omit in general. For example, suppose that the CPU didn’t
switch program counters. Then a trap from user space could switch to supervisor mode while still
running user instructions. Those user instructions could break user/kernel isolation, for example by
modifying thesatpregister to point to a page table that allowed accessing all of physical memory.
It is thus important that the CPU switch to a kernel-specified instruction address, namelystvec.

### 4.2 Traps from user space

Xv6 handles traps differently depending on whether the trap occurs while executing in the kernel
or in user code. Here is the story for traps from user code; Section 4.5 describes traps from kernel
code.
A trap may occur while executing in user space if the user program makes a system call (ecall
instruction), or does something illegal, or if a device interrupts. The high-level path of a trap from
user space isuservec(kernel/trampoline.S:22), thenusertrap(kernel/trap.c:37); and when re-
turning,usertrapret(kernel/trap.c:90)and thenuserret(kernel/trampoline.S:101).
A major constraint on the design of xv6’s trap handling is the fact that the RISC-V hardware
does not switch page tables when it forces a trap. This means that the trap handler address in
stvecmust have a valid mapping in the user page table, since that’s the page table in force when
the trap handling code starts executing. Furthermore, xv6’s trap handling code needs to switch to
the kernel page table; in order to be able to continue executing after that switch, the kernel page
table must also have a mapping for the handler pointed to bystvec.
Xv6 satisfies these requirements using atrampolinepage. The trampoline page containsuservec,
the xv6 trap handling code thatstvecpoints to. The trampoline page is mapped in every process’s
page table at addressTRAMPOLINE, which is at the top of the virtual address space so that it will be
above memory that programs use for themselves. The trampoline page is also mapped at address
TRAMPOLINEin the kernel page table. See Figure 2.3 and Figure 3.3. Because the trampoline
page is mapped in the user page table, traps can start executing there in supervisor mode. Because
the trampoline page is mapped at the same address in the kernel address space, the trap handler
can continue to execute after it switches to the kernel page table.
The code for theuservectrap handler is intrampoline.S(kernel/trampoline.S:22). When
uservecstarts, all 32 registers contain values owned by the interrupted user code. These 32
values need to be saved somewhere in memory, so that later on the kernel can restore them before
returning to user space. Storing to memory requires use of a register to hold the address, but at this
point there are no general-purpose registers available! Luckily RISC-V provides a helping hand in
the form of thesscratchregister. Thecsrwinstruction at the start ofuservecsavesa0in


sscratch. Nowuservechas one register (a0) to play with.

uservec’s next task is to save the 32 user registers. The kernel allocates, for each process, a
page of memory for atrapframestructure that (among other things) has space to save the 32
user registers(kernel/proc.h:43). Becausesatpstill refers to the user page table,uservecneeds
the trapframe to be mapped in the user address space. Xv6 maps each process’s trapframe at virtual
addressTRAPFRAMEin that process’s user page table;TRAPFRAMEis just belowTRAMPOLINE.
The process’sp->trapframealso points to the trapframe, though at its physical address so the
kernel can use it through the kernel page table.

Thususervecloads addressTRAPFRAMEintoa0and saves all the user registers there,
including the user’sa0, read back fromsscratch.

Thetrapframecontains the address of the current process’s kernel stack, the current CPU’s
hartid, the address of theusertrapfunction, and the address of the kernel page table.uservec
retrieves these values, switchessatpto the kernel page table, and jumps tousertrap.

The job ofusertrapis to determine the cause of the trap, process it, and return(kernel/-
trap.c:37). It first changesstvecso that a trap while in the kernel will be handled bykernelvec
rather thanuservec. It saves thesepcregister (the saved user program counter), because
usertrapmight callyieldto switch to another process’s kernel thread, and that process might
return to user space, in the process of which it will modifysepc. If the trap is a system call,
usertrapcallssyscallto handle it; if a device interrupt,devintr; otherwise it’s an ex-
ception, and the kernel kills the faulting process. The system call path adds four to the saved user
program counter because RISC-V, in the case of a system call, leaves the program pointer pointing
to theecallinstruction but user code needs to resume executing at the subsequent instruction.
On the way out,usertrapchecks if the process has been killed or should yield the CPU (if this
trap is a timer interrupt).

The first step in returning to user space is the call tousertrapret(kernel/trap.c:90). This
function sets up the RISC-V control registers to prepare for a future trap from user space: setting
stvectouservecand preparing the trapframe fields thatuservecrelies on.usertrapret
setssepcto the previously saved user program counter. At the end,usertrapretcallsuserret
on the trampoline page that is mapped in both user and kernel page tables; the reason is that as-
sembly code inuserretwill switch page tables.

usertrapret’s call touserretpasses a pointer to the process’s user page table ina0
(kernel/trampoline.S:101).userretswitchessatpto the process’s user page table. Recall that the
user page table maps both the trampoline page andTRAPFRAME, but nothing else from the kernel.
The trampoline page mapping at the same virtual address in user and kernel page tables allows
userretto keep executing after changingsatp. From this point on, the only datauserret
can use is the register contents and the content of the trapframe.userretloads theTRAPFRAME
address intoa0, restores saved user registers from the trapframe viaa0, restores the saved user
a0, and executessretto return to user space.


### 4.3 Code: Calling system calls

Chapter 2 ended withinitcode.Sinvoking theexecsystem call(user/initcode.S:11). Let’s look
at how the user call makes its way to theexecsystem call’s implementation in the kernel.
initcode.Splaces the arguments forexecin registersa0anda1, and puts the system call
number ina7. System call numbers match the entries in thesyscallsarray, a table of function
pointers(kernel/syscall.c:107). Theecallinstruction traps into the kernel and causesuservec,
usertrap, and thensyscallto execute, as we saw above.
syscall(kernel/syscall.c:132)retrieves the system call number from the saveda7in the trapframe
and uses it to index intosyscalls. For the first system call, a7contains SYS_exec(ker-
nel/syscall.h:8), resulting in a call to the system call implementation functionsys_exec.
Whensys_execreturns,syscallrecords its return value inp->trapframe->a0. This will
cause the original user-space call toexec()to return that value, since the C calling convention
on RISC-V places return values ina0. System calls conventionally return negative numbers to
indicate errors, and zero or positive numbers for success. If the system call number is invalid,
syscallprints an error and returns− 1.

### 4.4 Code: System call arguments

System call implementations in the kernel need to find the arguments passed by user code. Because
user code calls system call wrapper functions, the arguments are initially where the RISC-V C
calling convention places them: in registers. The kernel trap code saves user registers to the current
process’s trap frame, where kernel code can find them. The kernel functionsargint,argaddr,
andargfdretrieve then’th system call argument from the trap frame as an integer, pointer, or a file
descriptor. They all callargrawto retrieve the appropriate saved user register(kernel/syscall.c:34).
Some system calls pass pointers as arguments, and the kernel must use those pointers to read
or write user memory. Theexecsystem call, for example, passes the kernel an array of pointers
referring to string arguments in user space. These pointers pose two challenges. First, the user pro-
gram may be buggy or malicious, and may pass the kernel an invalid pointer or a pointer intended
to trick the kernel into accessing kernel memory instead of user memory. Second, the xv6 kernel
page table mappings are not the same as the user page table mappings, so the kernel cannot use
ordinary instructions to load or store from user-supplied addresses.
The kernel implements functions that safely transfer data to and from user-supplied addresses.
fetchstris an example(kernel/syscall.c:25). File system calls such asexecusefetchstrto
retrieve string file-name arguments from user space.fetchstrcallscopyinstrto do the hard
work.
copyinstr(kernel/vm.c:415)copies up tomaxbytes todstfrom virtual addresssrcvain
the user page tablepagetable. Sincepagetableisnotthe current page table,copyinstr
useswalkaddr(which callswalk) to look upsrcvainpagetable, yielding physical address
pa0. The kernel’s page table maps all of physical RAM at virtual addresses that are equal to the
RAM’s physical address. This allowscopyinstrto directly copy string bytes frompa0todst.
walkaddr(kernel/vm.c:109)checks that the user-supplied virtual address is part of the process’s


user address space, so programs cannot trick the kernel into reading other memory. A similar
function,copyout, copies data from the kernel to a user-supplied address.

### 4.5 Traps from kernel space

Xv6 handles traps from kernel code in a different way than traps from user code. When entering
the kernel,usertrappointsstvecto the assembly code atkernelvec(kernel/kernelvec.S:12).
Sincekernelveconly executes if xv6 was already in the kernel,kernelveccan rely on
satpbeing set to the kernel page table, and on the stack pointer referring to a valid kernel stack.
kernelvecpushes all 32 registers onto the stack, from which it will later restore them so that
the interrupted kernel code can resume without disturbance.
kernelvecsaves the registers on the stack of the interrupted kernel thread, which makes
sense because the register values belong to that thread. This is particularly important if the trap
causes a switch to a different thread – in that case the trap will actually return from the stack of the
new thread, leaving the interrupted thread’s saved registers safely on its stack.
kernelvecjumps tokerneltrap(kernel/trap.c:135)after saving registers.kerneltrap
is prepared for two types of traps: device interrupts and exceptions. It callsdevintr(kernel/-
trap.c:185)to check for and handle the former. If the trap isn’t a device interrupt, it must be an
exception, and that is always a fatal error if it occurs in the xv6 kernel; the kernel callspanicand
stops executing.
Ifkerneltrapwas called due to a timer interrupt, and a process’s kernel thread is running
(as opposed to a scheduler thread),kerneltrapcallsyieldto give other threads a chance to
run. At some point one of those threads will yield, and let our thread and itskerneltrapresume
again. Chapter 7 explains what happens inyield.
Whenkerneltrap’s work is done, it needs to return to whatever code was interrupted
by the trap. Because ayieldmay have disturbedsepcand the previous mode insstatus,
kerneltrapsaves them when it starts. It now restores those control registers and returns to
kernelvec(kernel/kernelvec.S:38).kernelvecpops the saved registers from the stack and ex-
ecutessret, which copiessepctopcand resumes the interrupted kernel code.
It’s worth thinking through how the trap return happens ifkerneltrapcalledyielddue to
a timer interrupt.
Xv6 sets a CPU’sstvectokernelvecwhen that CPU enters the kernel from user space;
you can see this inusertrap(kernel/trap.c:29). There’s a window of time when the kernel has
started executing butstvecis still set touservec, and it’s crucial that no device interrupt occur
during that window. Luckily the RISC-V always disables interrupts when it starts to take a trap,
andusertrapdoesn’t enable them again until after it setsstvec.

### 4.6 Page-fault exceptions

Xv6’s response to exceptions is quite boring: if an exception happens in user space, the kernel
kills the faulting process. If an exception happens in the kernel, the kernel panics. Real operating


systems often respond in much more interesting ways.

As an example, many kernels use page faults to implementcopy-on-write (COW) fork. To
explain copy-on-write fork, consider xv6’sfork, described in Chapter 3.forkcauses the child’s
initial memory content to be the same as the parent’s at the time of the fork. Xv6 implements fork
withuvmcopy(kernel/vm.c:313), which allocates physical memory for the child and copies the
parent’s memory into it. It would be more efficient if the child and parent could share the parent’s
physical memory. A straightforward implementation of this would not work, however, since it
would cause the parent and child to disrupt each other’s execution with their writes to the shared
stack and heap.

Parent and child can safely share physical memory by appropriate use of page-table permissions
and page faults. The CPU raises apage-fault exceptionwhen a virtual address is used that has no
mapping in the page table, or has a mapping whosePTE_Vflag is clear, or a mapping whose
permission bits (PTE_R,PTE_W,PTE_X,PTE_U) forbid the operation being attempted. RISC-V
distinguishes three kinds of page fault: load page faults (caused by load instructions), store page
faults (caused by store instructions), and instruction page faults (caused by fetches of instructions
to be executed). Thescauseregister indicates the type of the page fault and thestvalregister
contains the address that couldn’t be translated.

The basic plan in COW fork is for the parent and child to initially share all physical pages,
but for each to map them read-only (with thePTE_Wflag clear). Parent and child can read from
the shared physical memory. If either writes a given page, the RISC-V CPU raises a page-fault
exception. The kernel’s trap handler responds by allocating a new page of physical memory and
copying into it the physical page that the faulted address maps to. The kernel changes the relevant
PTE in the faulting process’s page table to point to the copy and to allow writes as well as reads,
and then resumes the faulting process at the instruction that caused the fault. Because the PTE
now allows writes, the re-executed instruction will execute without a fault. Copy-on-write requires
book-keeping to help decide when physical pages can be freed, since each page can be referenced
by a varying number of page tables depending on the history of forks, page faults, execs, and exits.
This book-keeping allows an important optimization: if a process incurs a store page fault and the
physical page is only referred to from that process’s page table, no copy is needed.

Copy-on-write makesforkfaster, sinceforkneed not copy memory. Some of the memory
will have to be copied later, when written, but it’s often the case that most of the memory never
has to be copied. A common example isforkfollowed byexec: a few pages may be written after
thefork, but then the child’sexecreleases the bulk of the memory inherited from the parent.
Copy-on-writeforkeliminates the need to ever copy this memory. Furthermore, COW fork is
transparent: no modifications to applications are necessary for them to benefit.

The combination of page tables and page faults opens up a wide range of interesting possibil-
ities in addition to COW fork. Another widely-used feature is calledlazy allocation, which has
two parts. First, when an application asks for more memory by callingsbrk, the kernel notes the
increase in size, but does not allocate physical memory and does not create PTEs for the new range
of virtual addresses. Second, on a page fault on one of those new addresses, the kernel allocates a
page of physical memory and maps it into the page table. Like COW fork, the kernel can implement
lazy allocation transparently to applications.


Since applications often ask for more memory than they need, lazy allocation is a win: the
kernel doesn’t have to do any work at all for pages that the application never uses. Furthermore,
if the application is asking to grow the address space by a lot, thensbrkwithout lazy allocation
is expensive: if an application asks for a gigabyte of memory, the kernel has to allocate and zero
262,144 4096-byte pages. Lazy allocation allows this cost to be spread over time. On the other
hand, lazy allocation incurs the extra overhead of page faults, which involve a user/kernel transi-
tion. Operating systems can reduce this cost by allocating a batch of consecutive pages per page
fault instead of one page and by specializing the kernel entry/exit code for such page-faults.

Yet another widely-used feature that exploits page faults isdemand paging. Inexec, xv6 loads
all of an application’s text and data into memory before starting the application. Since applications
can be large and reading from disk takes time, this startup cost can be noticeable to users. To
decrease startup time, a modern kernel doesn’t initially load the executable file into memory, but
just creates the user page table with all PTEs marked invalid. The kernel starts the program running;
each time the program uses a page for the first time, a page fault occurs, and in response the kernel
reads the content of the page from disk and maps it into the user address space. Like COW fork
and lazy allocation, the kernel can implement this feature transparently to applications.

The programs running on a computer may need more memory than the computer has RAM.
To cope gracefully, the operating system may implementpaging to disk. The idea is to store only
a fraction of user pages in RAM, and to store the rest on disk in apaging area. The kernel marks
PTEs that correspond to memory stored in the paging area (and thus not in RAM) as invalid. If an
application tries to use one of the pages that has beenpaged outto disk, the application will incur
a page fault, and the page must bepaged in: the kernel trap handler will allocate a page of physical
RAM, read the page from disk into the RAM, and modify the relevant PTE to point to the RAM.

What happens if a page needs to be paged in, but there is no free physical RAM? In that case,
the kernel must first free a physical page by paging it out orevictingit to the paging area on disk,
and marking the PTEs referring to that physical page as invalid. Eviction is expensive, so paging
performs best if it’s infrequent: if applications use only a subset of their memory pages and the
union of the subsets fits in RAM. This property is often referred to as having good locality of
reference. As with many virtual memory techniques, kernels usually implement paging to disk in
a way that’s transparent to applications.

Computers often operate with little or nofreephysical memory, regardless of how much RAM
the hardware provides. For example, cloud providers multiplex many customers on a single ma-
chine to use their hardware cost-effectively. As another example, users run many applications on
smart phones in a small amount of physical memory. In such settings allocating a page may require
first evicting an existing page. Thus, when free physical memory is scarce, allocation is expensive.

Lazy allocation and demand paging are particularly advantageous when free memory is scarce
and programs actively use only a fraction of their allocated memory. These techniques can also
avoid the work wasted when a page is allocated or loaded but either never used or evicted before it
can be used.

Other features that combine paging and page-fault exceptions include automatically extending
stacks andmemory-mapped files, which are files that a program mapped into its address space
using themmapsystem call so that the program can read and write them using load and store


instructions.

### 4.7 Real world

The trampoline and trapframe may seem excessively complex. A driving force is that the RISC-
V intentionally does as little as it can when forcing a trap, to allow the possibility of very fast
trap handling, which turns out to be important. As a result, the first few instructions of the kernel
trap handler effectively have to execute in the user environment: the user page table, and user
register contents. And the trap handler is initially ignorant of useful facts such as the identity of
the process that’s running or the address of the kernel page table. A solution is possible because
RISC-V provides protected places in which the kernel can stash away information before entering
user space: thesscratchregister, and user page table entries that point to kernel memory but
are protected by lack ofPTE_U. Xv6’s trampoline and trapframe exploit these RISC-V features.

The need for special trampoline pages could be eliminated if kernel memory were mapped
into every process’s user page table (withPTE_Uclear). That would also eliminate the need for a
page table switch when trapping from user space into the kernel. That in turn would allow system
call implementations in the kernel to take advantage of the current process’s user memory being
mapped, allowing kernel code to directly dereference user pointers. Many operating systems have
used these ideas to increase efficiency. Xv6 avoids them in order to reduce the chances of security
bugs in the kernel due to inadvertent use of user pointers, and to reduce some complexity that
would be required to ensure that user and kernel virtual addresses don’t overlap.
Production operating systems implement copy-on-write fork, lazy allocation, demand paging,
paging to disk, memory-mapped files, etc. Furthermore, production operating systems try to store
something useful in all areas of physical memory, typically caching file content in memory that
isn’t used by processes.
Production operating systems also provide applications with system calls to manage their
address spaces and implement their own page-fault handling through themmap,munmap, and
sigactionsystem calls, as well as providing calls to pin memory into RAM (seemlock) and
to advise the kernel how an application plans to use its memory (seemadvise).

### 4.8 Exercises

1. The functions copyinandcopyinstrwalk the user page table in software. Set up
    the kernel page table so that the kernel has the user program mapped, andcopyinand
    copyinstrcan usememcpyto copy system call arguments into kernel space, relying on
    the hardware to do the page table walk.
2. Implement lazy memory allocation.
3. Implement COW fork.


4. Is there a way to eliminate the specialTRAPFRAMEpage mapping in every user address
    space? For example, coulduservecbe modified to simply push the 32 user registers onto
    the kernel stack, or store them in theprocstructure?
5. Could xv6 be modified to eliminate the specialTRAMPOLINEpage mapping?
6. Implementmmap.