

# Chapter 5

# Interrupts and device drivers

Adriveris the code in an operating system that manages a particular device: it configures the device
hardware, tells the device to perform operations, handles the resulting interrupts, and interacts with
processes that may be waiting for I/O from the device. Driver code can be tricky because a driver
executes concurrently with the device that it manages. In addition, the driver must understand the
device’s hardware interface, which can be complex and poorly documented.
Devices that need attention from the operating system can usually be configured to generate
interrupts, which are one type of trap. The kernel trap handling code recognizes when a device
has raised an interrupt and calls the driver’s interrupt handler; in xv6, this dispatch happens in
devintr(kernel/trap.c:185).
Many device drivers execute code in two contexts: atop half that runs in a process’s kernel
thread, and abottom half that executes at interrupt time. The top half is called via system calls
such asreadandwritethat want the device to perform I/O. This code may ask the hardware
to start an operation (e.g., ask the disk to read a block); then the code waits for the operation
to complete. Eventually the device completes the operation and raises an interrupt. The driver’s
interrupt handler, acting as the bottom half, figures out what operation has completed, wakes up a
waiting process if appropriate, and tells the hardware to start work on any waiting next operation.

### 5.1 Code: Console input

The console driver(kernel/console.c)is a simple illustration of driver structure. The console driver
accepts characters typed by a human, via theUARTserial-port hardware attached to the RISC-V.
The console driver accumulates a line of input at a time, processing special input characters such as
backspace and control-u. User processes, such as the shell, use thereadsystem call to fetch lines
of input from the console. When you type input to xv6 in QEMU, your keystrokes are delivered to
xv6 by way of QEMU’s simulated UART hardware.
The UART hardware that the driver talks to is a 16550 chip [13] emulated by QEMU. On a real
computer, a 16550 would manage an RS232 serial link connecting to a terminal or other computer.
When running QEMU, it’s connected to your keyboard and display.
The UART hardware appears to software as a set ofmemory-mappedcontrol registers. That


is, there are some physical addresses that RISC-V hardware connects to the UART device, so that
loads and stores interact with the device hardware rather than RAM. The memory-mapped ad-
dresses for the UART start at 0x10000000, orUART0(kernel/memlayout.h:21). There are a handful
of UART control registers, each the width of a byte. Their offsets fromUART0are defined in
(kernel/uart.c:22). For example, theLSRregister contains bits that indicate whether input characters
are waiting to be read by the software. These characters (if any) are available for reading from
theRHRregister. Each time one is read, the UART hardware deletes it from an internal FIFO of
waiting characters, and clears the “ready” bit inLSRwhen the FIFO is empty. The UART transmit
hardware is largely independent of the receive hardware; if software writes a byte to theTHR, the
UART transmits that byte.
Xv6’smaincallsconsoleinit(kernel/console.c:182)to initialize the UART hardware. This
code configures the UART to generate a receive interrupt when the UART receives each byte of
input, and atransmit completeinterrupt each time the UART finishes sending a byte of output
(kernel/uart.c:53).
The xv6 shell reads from the console by way of a file descriptor opened byinit.c(user/init.c:19).
Calls to thereadsystem call make their way through the kernel toconsoleread(kernel/con-
sole.c:80).consolereadwaits for input to arrive (via interrupts) and be buffered incons.buf,
copies the input to user space, and (after a whole line has arrived) returns to the user process. If
the user hasn’t typed a full line yet, any reading processes will wait in thesleepcall(kernel/con-
sole.c:96)(Chapter 7 explains the details ofsleep).
When the user types a character, the UART hardware asks the RISC-V to raise an interrupt,
which activates xv6’s trap handler. The trap handler callsdevintr(kernel/trap.c:185), which looks
at the RISC-Vscauseregister to discover that the interrupt is from an external device. Then it
asks a hardware unit called the PLIC [3] to tell it which device interrupted(kernel/trap.c:193). If it
was the UART,devintrcallsuartintr.
uartintr(kernel/uart.c:177)reads any waiting input characters from the UART hardware and
hands them toconsoleintr(kernel/console.c:136); it doesn’t wait for characters, since future
input will raise a new interrupt. The job ofconsoleintris to accumulate input characters in
cons.bufuntil a whole line arrives.consoleintrtreats backspace and a few other characters
specially. When a newline arrives,consoleintrwakes up a waitingconsoleread(if there
is one).
Once woken,consolereadwill observe a full line incons.buf, copy it to user space, and
return (via the system call machinery) to user space.

### 5.2 Code: Console output

Awritesystem call on a file descriptor connected to the console eventually arrives atuartputc
(kernel/uart.c:87). The device driver maintains an output buffer (uart_tx_buf) so that writing
processes do not have to wait for the UART to finish sending; instead,uartputcappends each
character to the buffer, callsuartstartto start the device transmitting (if it isn’t already), and
returns. The only situation in whichuartputcwaits is if the buffer is already full.
Each time the UART finishes sending a byte, it generates an interrupt.uartintrcallsuartstart,


which checks that the device really has finished sending, and hands the device the next buffered
output character. Thus if a process writes multiple bytes to the console, typically the first byte will
be sent byuartputc’s call touartstart, and the remaining buffered bytes will be sent by
uartstartcalls fromuartintras transmit complete interrupts arrive.
A general pattern to note is the decoupling of device activity from process activity via buffering
and interrupts. The console driver can process input even when no process is waiting to read it; a
subsequent read will see the input. Similarly, processes can send output without having to wait for
the device. This decoupling can increase performance by allowing processes to execute concur-
rently with device I/O, and is particularly important when the device is slow (as with the UART)
or needs immediate attention (as with echoing typed characters). This idea is sometimes calledI/O
concurrency.

### 5.3 Concurrency in drivers

You may have noticed calls toacquireinconsolereadand inconsoleintr. These calls
acquire a lock, which protects the console driver’s data structures from concurrent access. There
are three concurrency dangers here: two processes on different CPUs might callconsoleread
at the same time; the hardware might ask a CPU to deliver a console (really UART) interrupt while
that CPU is already executing insideconsoleread; and the hardware might deliver a console
interrupt on a different CPU whileconsolereadis executing. Chapter 6 explains how to use
locks to ensure that these dangers don’t lead to incorrect results.
Another way in which concurrency requires care in drivers is that one process may be waiting
for input from a device, but the interrupt signaling arrival of the input may arrive when a different
process (or no process at all) is running. Thus interrupt handlers are not allowed to think about
the process or code that they have interrupted. For example, an interrupt handler cannot safely
callcopyoutwith the current process’s page table. Interrupt handlers typically do relatively little
work (e.g., just copy the input data to a buffer), and wake up top-half code to do the rest.

### 5.4 Timer interrupts

Xv6 uses timer interrupts to maintain its idea of the current time and to switch among compute-
bound processes. Timer interrupts come from clock hardware attached to each RISC-V CPU. Xv6
programs each CPU’s clock hardware to interrupt the CPU periodically.
Code instart.c(kernel/start.c:53)sets some control bits that allow supervisor-mode access
to the timer control registers, and then asks for the first timer interrupt. Thetimecontrol register
contains a count that the hardware increments at a steady rate; this serves as a notion of the current
time. Thestimecmpregister contains a time at which the the CPU will raise a timer interrupt;
settingstimecmpto the current value oftimeplusxwill schedule an interruptxtime units in
the future. Forqemu’s RISC-V emulation, 1000000 time units is roughly a tenth of second.
Timer interrupts arrive viausertraporkerneltrapanddevintr, like other device in-
terrupts. Timer interrupts arrive withscause’s low bits set to five;devintrintrap.cdetects


this situation and callsclockintr(kernel/trap.c:164). The latter function incrementsticks, al-
lowing the kernel to track the passage of time. The increment occurs on only one CPU, to avoid
time passing faster if there are multiple CPUs.clockintrwakes up any processes waiting in
thesleepsystem call, and schedules the next timer interrupt by writingstimecmp.

devintrreturns 2 for a timer interrupt in order to indicate tokerneltraporusertrap
that they should callyieldso that CPUs can be multiplexed among runnable processes.

The fact that kernel code can be interrupted by a timer interrupt that forces a context switch via
yieldis part of the reason why early code inusertrapis careful to save state such assepc
before enabling interrupts. These context switches also mean that kernel code must be written in
the knowledge that it may move from one CPU to another without warning.

### 5.5 Real world

Xv6, like many operating systems, allows interrupts and even context switches (viayield) while
executing in the kernel. The reason for this is to retain quick response times during complex sys-
tem calls that run for a long time. However, as noted above, allowing interrupts in the kernel is
the source of some complexity; as a result, a few operating systems allow interrupts only while
executing user code.
Supporting all the devices on a typical computer in its full glory is much work, because there
are many devices, the devices have many features, and the protocol between device and driver can
be complex and poorly documented. In many operating systems, the drivers account for more code
than the core kernel.

The UART driver retrieves data a byte at a time by reading the UART control registers; this
pattern is calledprogrammed I/O, since software is driving the data movement. Programmed I/O
is simple, but too slow to be used at high data rates. Devices that need to move lots of data at high
speed typically usedirect memory access (DMA). DMA device hardware directly writes incoming
data to RAM, and reads outgoing data from RAM. Modern disk and network devices use DMA.
A driver for a DMA device would prepare data in RAM, and then use a single write to a control
register to tell the device to process the prepared data.

Interrupts make sense when a device needs attention at unpredictable times, and not too often.
But interrupts have high CPU overhead. Thus high speed devices, such as network and disk con-
trollers, use tricks that reduce the need for interrupts. One trick is to raise a single interrupt for a
whole batch of incoming or outgoing requests. Another trick is for the driver to disable interrupts
entirely, and to check the device periodically to see if it needs attention. This technique is called
polling. Polling makes sense if the device performs operations at a high rate, but it wastes CPU
time if the device is mostly idle. Some drivers dynamically switch between polling and interrupts
depending on the current device load.

The UART driver copies incoming data first to a buffer in the kernel, and then to user space.
This makes sense at low data rates, but such a double copy can significantly reduce performance
for devices that generate or consume data very quickly. Some operating systems are able to directly
move data between user-space buffers and device hardware, often with DMA.


As mentioned in Chapter 1, the console appears to applications as a regular file, and applica-
tions read input and write output using thereadandwritesystem calls. Applications may want
to control aspects of a device that cannot be expressed through the standard file system calls (e.g.,
enabling/disabling line buffering in the console driver). Unix operating systems support theioctl
system call for such cases.
Some usages of computers require that the system must respond in a bounded time. For exam-
ple, in safety-critical systems missing a deadline can lead to disasters. Xv6 is not suitable for hard
real-time settings. Operating systems for hard real-time tend to be libraries that link with the appli-
cation in a way that allows for an analysis to determine the worst-case response time. Xv6 is also
not suitable for soft real-time applications, when missing a deadline occasionally is acceptable,
because xv6’s scheduler is too simplistic and it has kernel code path where interrupts are disabled
for a long time.

### 5.6 Exercises

1. Modifyuart.cto not use interrupts at all. You may need to modifyconsole.cas well.
2. Add a driver for an Ethernet card.

